[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard, and
this is "Mystery Teachings."
Is there a way to awaken our
greater potential, and what
does that really mean?
To find out, let's unfold both
the science and metaphysics
of our human capacities.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
We are incredible beings
with huge potential
that is largely untapped and
is just waiting to be awakened.
Current statistics from
science are fascinating.
Less than 5% of the
universe around us
is made of ordinary
matter that we can detect.
The other 95% is made up of
mysterious substances called
dark matter and dark energy.
But science doesn't
know what it is.
Then consider that of this
5%, we only directly perceive
a small portion of the
vibrational spectrum
with our five physical senses.
On top of this,
psychologists speculate
that, like an iceberg, the
amount that we are consciously
aware of is just the
tip of the iceberg,
while the majority is processed
subconsciously or even
unconsciously.
Likewise, we are only
using about 1% to 3%
of our DNA to build the
proteins that conduct
all of our bodies' needs.
Combining all this
together, at least somewhere
between 90% to 99%
room for growth
in our awareness of who we are
and this universe we live in.
What this means is we
are barely even accessing
one snowflake on the tip of
the iceberg of our potential.
What if we can
bring greater levels
of awareness and consciousness
into this process?
What if we can start to perceive
more of the true reality
around us?
What if we can start
tapping into more
of our full potential?
Imagine what we could accomplish
if we started accessing even
a fraction more of those
hidden resources within us.
We could turn on abilities,
such as enhanced immunity,
inner genius, extra sensory
perception, better memory,
remembering our true purpose
in life, having more energy,
vitality, and longevity,
activating our superhuman
abilities, and so much more.
Think of what's depicted
in movies like Lucy
or Dr. Strange, X-Men
or Neo in the Matrix.
We actually do have
that kind of potential.
The question is-- can
we wake it up and bring
it more fully onboard?
And the answer is yes.
What is the essence that
makes all of this possible?
As we explored
through Season One,
quantum principles underlie
everything in our universe.
We live in a quantum universe.
From the smallest of
particles to the largest
structures of intergalactic
space, we are quantum beings.
We've all heard the phrase
everything is energy.
Einstein's famous
equation e equals
MC squared says that mass times
the speed of light squared
is equal to energy.
But it's not just
mass that's energy.
Our thoughts and
emotions are energy, too.
When we talk about
holding more light within,
what does that really mean?
Is it just a spiritual saying?
Or is there a physical
component to it, as well?
Metaphysically,
it means we carry
a higher or faster
vibration of energy
in both our soul and body.
Spiritually, this requires that
we expand our consciousness
and perceptions.
Physically, we
also need to expand
at the level of our atomic
and energetic structures that
make up our body.
And by expansion,
we literally mean
that we expand so
that we can contain
more empty space within.
And this idea of empty
space is really important
when it comes to
activating our potential.
With the right amount
of new light or energy,
our electrons can
make quantum leaps
and excite to higher
energy states within us.
Our electrons actually
become more highly energized.
What's important here is
that when the electrons jump
to a higher orbital,
that creates
more empty space between the
electrons and the nucleus.
But as we know, empty
space is not really empty.
It's teeming with infinite
possibility and virtual energy.
It's called the
zero point field,
but it's not actually zero.
On the contrary,
there is a vast amount
of potential energy contained
within it at the quantum level.
Theoretical physicists Richard
Feynman and John Wheeler
once calculated the zero
point energy radiation
of the vacuum to be
an order of magnitude
greater than nuclear energy.
Feynman was quoted
as saying, there
is enough energy in a
single cubic meter of space
to boil all of the
oceans of the world.
This is the essence of creation.
In Season One of
Mystery Teachings,
we explored this and how to
truly access the quantum space.
Now in Season Two, let's dive
into the practical applications
and how to truly
awaken our potential.
Where do we start this process?
To awaken our
potential more fully,
we begin by making a shift in
our awareness and perception.
Expanding our awareness not
only within the physical
and our ability to perceive
with our five senses,
but also expanding within the
mental, emotional, and ethereal
planes.
As we do this, we
begin operating
with more awareness of
our multi-dimensionality,
and we begin to influence
higher planes of causation.
This is a process
of self mastery,
and it is about
expanding our awareness,
raising our vibration,
and transforming
into the light body.
It's about reaching
a level where
we can operate consciously
all the way down
to the atomic scale,
and it's about accessing
more of the infinite
possibilities within us.
Like a professional
athlete who is training
to maximize performance, we
must approach self mastery
with a similar commitment to
our daily practice and training.
By doing the work daily
to expand our perceptions,
to train our brain for greater
awareness, harness our will,
and to make the
lifestyle choices
that support our full potential.
The hermetic principle
of cause and effect
says every cause has its effect.
Every effect has its cause.
Everything happens
according to law.
Chance is but a name
for law not recognized.
There are many
planes of causation,
but nothing escapes the law.
True magic happens when we
begin to influence these higher
planes of causation.
But in order to consciously
influence these higher planes,
we must reach higher
states of consciousness.
This is something we
can do by learning
to shift our brainwaves,
overcoming limited thinking
and achieving a
state of coherence
with the quantum field.
As we begin to master how
we perceive and process
information or
energy, such mastery
doesn't happen through
a single process.
We must take a
multi-dimensional approach.
Thankfully, we have many
tools, both modern and ancient,
to support us in
making this shift.
Some of the tools
include meditation,
which we use to bring ourselves
into coherence with the zero
point field.
Activating our DNA
codes, which helps
us to express more of our
potential in the physical body.
Exercises to expand both our
physical and spiritual senses
and perceptions.
And these are just a few of
the many tools available to us
to help us become aware of
our multi-dimensionality.
In the Western
mystical tradition,
we have many hermetic
and alchemical methods
for how to tap into those
higher planes of causation.
Primarily, this comes
from understanding
how to communicate using the
language of the universe,
including numbers, letters,
sounds, and sacred geometry.
How do we learn this language?
Like with any
language, we learn best
through immersing ourselves
into its culture, symbology,
proper use, syntax
and daily practice.
Or we can return
again to the analogy
of a professional athlete.
The pros train every day to
prepare themselves and sharpen
their ability to perform.
When it comes to
the physical body,
if we stop our
routine of exercise,
we can lose ground very quickly.
Muscles atrophy,
and then we have
to work harder to regain
the ground that was lost.
It's much easier to just
keep up the daily practice
and momentum, and not
let stagnation set in.
The most successful pros make
training into a lifestyle,
rather than just doing
it in short spurts.
The same principles apply
to spiritual mastery.
It requires daily practice,
using the right methods,
to condition our spiritual
muscles, increasing
strength, power, and endurance.
This also helps us to
sustainably operate
at the higher levels
of performance.
Dion Fortune, an initiate with
the Western Mystery School
Tradition says, "When
we speak of the Path,
we mean much more than
a course of study.
The Path is a way of life.
And on it, the whole
being must cooperate
if the heights are to be won."
What happens when we
stop our daily practice?
Well, for one thing,
the energy doesn't
flow as well in our life,
meaning we encounter more bumps
through our daily
activities, we might not
handle stressful situations
with as much equanimity.
Daily spiritual practices that
include rituals and energy
exercises are great tools for
harnessing and strengthening
our will.
Meditation primarily
helps to quiet the mind
and expand consciousness.
Rituals, on the other
hand, are a more active way
of directing the flow of energy
and applying our higher will.
And it is our will that directs
our mind which, in turn,
influences the quantum field.
If our will is undisciplined,
then our lower mind
tends to run the show,
and that lower mind
can be a monkey mind when
it is not well trained.
In the Western Mystery
School tradition,
we have a daily
affirmation that we use
to start our ritual practice.
We say, it is by will alone
that I set my mind in motion.
Just contemplating this one
affirmation on a regular basis
can reveal many secrets
to self mastery,
and the laws of manifestation.
It is a very important key.
Taking this even further, the
hermetic principle of vibration
says, nothing rests.
Everything moves.
Everything vibrates.
This is true at all scales.
From the subatomic to the
cosmic, everything is moving.
When we think about how
this applies to our life,
we see that we, too,
are always moving.
We are either moving
forwards or backwards.
We are progressing
or we're regressing.
We're either in
a flow or an ebb.
If we stop our good
practices, as much
as we might like
to tell ourselves
that we can maintain
where we're at
and just pick up later
where we left off,
this is not what happens.
Instead, we lose ground.
But when we integrate the right
daily practices into our life,
we gain and then maintain.
This is true whether our
daily practice consists
of meditation, qigong,
yoga, focused breathing,
or various esoteric rituals.
They all help.
Daily practice with
a certain routine
brings us to a certain
level, but then we
might experience a plateau.
In order to make
the next leap, we
have to challenge ourselves to
move outside the comfort zone,
to stretch and grow in new
ways while still maintaining
what has been gained.
It is key that we continue
to challenge ourselves
to the next level of
our greater capacity
by staying humble and seeking
new knowledge so that we
can continue our growth.
Along the path to
greater self mastery,
there are inevitably
obstacles we must also
look out for and be mindful of.
These obstacles are places
where we can get stuck.
And as a hermetic
principle correspondent
says, as above, so below.
Or as the outer, so the inner.
Even though the
obstacles may appear
to be from things outside of
us, they are almost always
a reflection of
something inside us.
Otherwise, we wouldn't
let them get in our way.
What obstacles do
we need to watch out
for so that we can have more
accurate perception of reality?
These obstacles come from our
biases, our judgments, fears,
and assumptions.
The things that are
within our subconscious
mind that will distort
and cloud our perceptions.
We must face and
address these things
in order to have clarity
in our perception.
This is crucial in the
path to self mastery.
We just established that only
5% of the universe around us
is made of ordinary matter
that we can observe and detect.
Within this 5%, our
five physical senses
are further limited to
perceiving a very narrow range
of frequencies.
For example, the range
of electromagnetic energy
that we can see falls within
the band of frequencies
that we call the
visible light spectrum.
Similarly, there are ranges of
what we can hear, feel, taste,
and touch.
But we know that the
full spectrum of energies
is much broader than what our
five physical senses typically
perceive.
We also have what we could
call our five spiritual senses.
This is our
perception of stimulus
coming in through the
energy field of our soul,
rather than the physical
field of our environment.
Yet the range of perception
of our five spiritual senses
also tends to be narrow
compared to the full spectrum
of energies that
we are exposed to.
What we perceive and are aware
of through our ten senses,
both physical and spiritual,
is a very narrow percentage
of what affects us.
For example, people
talk about EMFs
from Wi-Fi and
cellular networks.
We don't typically perceive EMFs
with our five physical senses,
yet we know they affect us
and we know they are there,
and research has shown that
they do have a physical effect.
Now, through science, we've
been able to detect these ranges
beyond our physical senses.
We can also observe animals
who have a sensitivity
to perceiving ranges that
are different from humans.
But just because
we aren't aware,
doesn't mean we
can't become aware.
We can train our senses to
tune into a broader range.
We can condition ourselves and
reprogram our nervous system.
Our senses are malleable
and can be adjusted.
One good case study of this
shows how blind people often
develop their other four
senses, such as hearing, touch,
and smell, to be incredibly more
sensitive than most people who
can see with their eyes.
These people have
enhanced brain development
due to their more
finely tuned senses,
and this also has
the added benefit
of enhancing other abilities,
like memory and language
capacity.
How much of our brain
do we actually use?
We often hear in popular
culture that we only
use 10% of our brain capacity,
but that is a misnomer.
The truth is we use 100%
of our brain capacity,
but most people are only
consciously aware of maybe 10%.
If we were to hypnotize
somebody after walking down
a busy street, they could have
100% recall of the information
they were exposed to.
They could even remember things
like license plate numbers,
price tags on items in the
store windows, conversations
that other people were having
that they passed, and so on.
But if we were to ask
them what they remembered,
without hypnosis
most of us would only
recall maybe 10%
of those details.
The areas of the brain we
tend to be more conscious of
are in the cerebral cortex,
or the uppermost portion
of the brain.
Our conscious decision
making process
happens primarily in
the prefrontal cortex,
the front part of the brain that
rests just behind the forehead.
However, the deeper
parts of the brain,
including the limbic
system and old brain,
are usually operating beneath
the surface of our awareness.
We like to think that we have
full control of our decisions
and actions.
But in reality, the neural
firings of the brain
usually start in the old brain
system deep within, and then
flow from the bottom
up and then forward.
What does this mean?
Well, our old brain is more of
our habitual and instinctual
patterning.
It governs our basic
survival of the body.
When we're stressed, feeling
any kind of fear or pressure
in some way, then the old
brain's survival instincts
kick in.
This sends the signals up to
the higher parts of the brain,
triggering various emotional
responses in the limbic system
and then thoughts in the cortex.
Those thoughts and
emotion then lead
us to make a decision
to act in a way that
will help us survive.
So in reality, our
higher brain capacities,
such as executive decision
making and abstract planning,
can get hijacked by our survival
instincts when we are stressed.
We call this survival mode, and
when someone's in this mode,
it is hard for them to see past
their immediate circumstances.
One of our goals in self mastery
is to gain control of ourselves
so that our animal instincts
don't hijack our higher mind.
Fortunately, we can become
more conscious and in control
by rewiring our brain.
To do this, we use
certain sensory inputs
to more purposefully
and harmoniously
stimulate the brain
to take advantage
of its neuroplasticity.
We can retrain our patterns
at the very foundations
of our brain.
Our old brain controls
things like heart rate, body
temperature, breathing rate,
and as we become more aware
of these operations, we not
only perceive the subtle changes
in our body functions
much more quickly,
but we can more easily identify
what is stimulating the change.
We become much more
in tune with our body
as an instrument of
perception, and we
identify the cause of a
stimulus much more readily,
developing that uncanny
ability to sense something
before it happens.
How does this awareness
play into our intuition?
Well, for sure, part of
what we call intuition
or the sixth sense
is simply a matter
of having more enhanced
physical sensory perception.
But there's more to it, as well.
We also have our spiritual
senses of our energy body
that can detect more subtle
energies and higher vibrations
coming in from spirit.
When we can combine a
heightened sense of ability
to perceive more with our
five physical senses along
with our five
spiritual senses, that
is when we become truly
superhuman in our awareness
of what is going on.
So what are our
spiritual senses?
These include our
perception of energy fields,
such as magnetic energy, etheric
energies, the four elements
of earth, water, air, and
fire, the energies of the aura
and higher dimensional energies.
An example is when the hairs
on the back of our neck or arms
stand up.
We may be having an
intuitive pit, a perception
of subtle energies.
This phenomenon in the body
is governed by the old brain.
Many people don't pay attention
to this kind of thing,
or maybe they
rationalize it away
and they stay unaware of what
is stimulating this response.
But the more in tune
we become, the more
we are aware of these sensations
as soon as they happen.
We can then pay
attention to the signal
to identify what's going
on around us that might
be triggering this response.
Could it be that we are
empathically picking up
on someone else's field?
Empaths often feel what
others are feeling.
But when we don't have full
awareness of our field,
we often misinterpret
the stimulus
and might mistake it as our own.
This is where empaths tend
to take on the emotions
and energies of other people.
But with greater awareness and
self-knowledge, we can realize,
this feeling isn't mine.
It's coming from someone else.
We don't have to take it on as
long as we know it's not ours.
Instead, we can use that
information as a gift,
to be aware of how am I going to
interact with this person now?
This information can help us
navigate our relationships
and better serve other people.
As an empath, rather than
shutting down or withdrawing,
we can learn to use
this gift to serve
from a place of
compassion and empathy.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
When working with
our intuition, there
is another major challenge
that we must overcome in order
to perceive more accurately
with our spiritual senses,
and that is the social
programming that most of us
have experienced, which causes
us to doubt our own intuition.
In the age of
rationalism, we've learned
to doubt intuitive perceptions
coming from the right brain
or deeper parts of us.
If it doesn't make
sense to our left brain,
or rational thinking, we've
been programmed to dismiss it.
I've had experiences
with this personally.
In science, we are trained
to be very skeptical
until something is proven.
Everything has to
make sense and fit
within a logical,
rational framework.
But as I started to awaken
more of my potential
by activating my DNA,
and brain capacity,
and through my
spiritual practice,
I started becoming more and more
aware of my intuitive thoughts.
But I also realized
I was automatically
dismissing many of them.
An intuitive flash
would come in,
and then this other part of me
would say, well, that's silly.
Why would I do that?
That doesn't make
any sense, and I
would dismiss the
intuitive idea right away
in favor of my logic.
Fortunately, I started
having a series of events
within a short period
of time where I quickly
experienced and learned
the results of not
listening to my intuition.
There'd be moments where I'd
realize I should have listened.
Have you ever experienced
something similar to this?
How do we remedy this
so that we can become
more attuned to our intuition?
It starts by paying attention
to those little thoughts that
flash through our mind.
Then we must catch
ourselves in the act
whenever we realize we're
dismissing something off hand.
Next, we backtrack
to what were we just
thinking a moment before.
What was that thought?
Once we trace it
back, we can ask, hm.
Would it do any
harm to follow it?
If there's no harm that could
be done, then give it a try
and see what happens,
see what results.
For me, as I test these
intuitive thoughts out,
they usually would
reveal themselves
to be valid and produce
good fruits or results.
The more they're validated
by their results,
the more we start
trusting our own intuition
and quieting our doubting mind.
To do this, first we must
become aware of our thoughts.
We have to be aware
of the script playing
in the background.
Once we're aware,
we can reprogram it.
We can reprogram it to
trust our intuition.
The right hemisphere
of the brain,
which is connected to
our deeper intuition
and processes in a more
Gestalt or big picture way,
can assess a given
situation much faster
than our left hemisphere.
That's because the left
hemisphere focuses more
on the details and minutia.
Plus our intuitive right brain
processing of the whole picture
can size up a situation with 85%
accuracy within three seconds
or less.
In science today, they
call this thin slicing
and rapid cognition
rather than intuition,
but they work together.
Unfortunately, in our left
brain dominated world,
our biases and judgments are
often filtering, distorting,
or negating our intuition.
Intuition does not operate
with the kind of linear logic
that we tend to
be biased towards.
We might not be
able to explain it,
but that doesn't mean
it's not correct.
Intuition and the right
hemisphere of the brain
operate with a
non-linear logic, which
can be much faster and accurate,
even if we can't say why
until we get more details.
For example, the right
side of our brain
processes pictures, while
the left processes words.
We say, a picture is
worth a thousand words.
From a single image, we can
gather a depth of information
very quickly, both consciously
and unconsciously, mentally
and emotionally.
This happens much faster
than when we receive it
from a written
description that gets
processed through our
linear left brain logic.
So we must learn to
listen to our intuition
and then gain mastery.
By having more experience
under our belt,
we come to recognize the
subtle feelings coming
from the deeper parts of the
brain and nervous system.
Many great thinkers of our time
have emphasized the importance
of intuition and nonlinear
qualities of right brain
thinking.
Albert Einstein once
said, "I believe
in intuition and inspiration.
Imagination is more
important than knowledge.
For knowledge is limited,
whereas imagination embraces
the entire world,
stimulating progress,
giving birth to evolution."
Einstein's notion of
embracing the whole
and stimulating progress and
evolution points to the quantum
world view.
The view that recognizes
how all things are
connected and interrelated.
This shift into the
quantum way of thinking
leads us to truly
unlimited potential.
Our consciousness has its
home in the multiverse,
the infinite space
of the quantum realm.
Are we aware of this
limitless connection?
Are we aware of
our infinite self?
Believing in something and
being aware of something
are two different things.
We might believe
or have a concept
that we are connected
and infinite,
but our full conscious
awareness of this truth
is typically lacking
in people today.
Due to our limited
perceptions, we're
barely even aware of
the universe around us.
Most people are usually only
aware of about the first nine
feet of their energy field, let
alone the rest of the globe.
This means the potential
for us to expand
into a more active
awareness is huge.
We are only tapping into
a small fraction of it,
but we are meant
to get to the point
where we are aware of not only
our connection to each other,
but to our galactic
connection, as well.
We could have heightened
awareness of our own body--
our heart rate, the
activities in ourselves,
even the atoms of our body--
as well as awareness of
other people's energies.
We could perceive the
life force within plants
and communicate
telepathically with animals
and with each other.
We'd be able to perceive a
wider spectrum of energies.
If we can bring our awareness
to the atomic level,
we can access atomic
consciousness.
What do we mean by
atomic consciousness?
Well, it's a level
of attainment where
we can control the atoms of
our body and our environment.
Basically, we would have the
ability to direct consciousness
by will alone.
How do we begin to apply
all of this into our lives
and truly awaken to
our greater potential?
Throughout this season
of Mystery Teachings,
I share a variety of
practical exercises
for putting these
concepts into action.
By using them on
a daily basis, we
can experience transformation,
expand our consciousness,
and shift our awareness from
the microcosm to the macrocosm.
Let's begin with the
following visualization.
We start by taking a few deep
breaths and begin to relax.
As we breathe, we bring our
awareness to our solar plexus.
Think of the solar plexus as the
microcosm, and breathe into it.
Then, with the
exhale, feel and see
the energy moving through
the entire nervous system.
The nervous system
is the macrocosm
to the microcosm of
the solar plexus.
Then we shift our attention
to the next level.
As we now inhale, imagine
the nervous system
as the microcosm.
And with the
exhale, see and feel
the energy moving throughout
the whole physical body.
The physical body
is the macrocosm
to the microcosm of
the nervous system.
Next, the physical body becomes
the microcosm as we breathe in,
while the soul and mind
become the macrocosm
as we breathe out.
We continue this pattern
of shifting from microcosm,
to macrocosm, to
microcosm, and so on,
taking several
breaths for each level
before shifting to the next.
Really feel it.
Now, inhale to the
soul as the microcosm,
and exhale to your divine
spirit as the macrocosm.
Notice the difference between
the two states of awareness.
Notice the shift when we
consider macrocosm as the soul,
compared to the
microcosm as the soul.
It isn't something to
understand in a logical way.
We must tune into the
flow and feeling of it,
and how it is all connected.
Next, inhale to the
spirit as the microcosm.
Exhale to the galaxy or the
cosmos as the macrocosm.
Inhale to the cosmos
as the microcosm.
Exhale to the logos or
spirit behind the cosmos
as the macrocosm.
Inhale to the logos
as the microcosm.
Exhale to the whole
universe as the macrocosm.
Inhale to the universe
as the microcosm.
Exhale to the multiverse
as the macrocosm.
Inhale to the multiverse
as the microcosm,
and exhale to the nervous
system of the multiverse
as the macrocosm.
Focus on the breath
as we do this.
Breathing in, and breathing out.
As we breathe in, we are
drawing the microcosm into us.
As we breathe out, we are
expressing and flowing
our microcosm into
the macrocosm.
Finally, notice the
connection between
our own neurological system
and that of the multiverse.
The neurological system is
the multiverse within us.
The solar plexus is
our connection point,
like the great central sun.
And it is through
the solar plexus
that we can connect
to all our relations.
All these nerve
bundles coming into it,
the whole neurological system
goes through the solar plexus.
So this is our main connection
point to the multiverse.
Flow this formula every day
through your soul, spirit,
and mind.
Have it active within you
every day in your life.
Our true potential
reaches everywhere,
from this density all
the way back to source.
It is an infinite spectrum.
There is no limit to
how much we can awaken.
We must recognize that we
are not just physical beings.
Our limitless potential
comes from our spirit, not
our physicality.
Our physicality is
but a reflection
of our soul and spirit.
Join me again as
we dive even deeper
into our infinite potential.
I'm Dr. Theresa Bullard.
Thank you for
exploring the mysteries
of our human potential with
me in this episode of "Mystery
Teachings."
[MUSIC PLAYING]